It's not enough to make
the wireless access digital,
because as you saw in
the previous section,
when the telephone goes digital,
you need 64 kilobits per second per user.
And you could not put so much of
the voice traffic on the air interface.
This is where some of the early
work at AT&T to reduce
64 kilobits per second
per voice to fall to
12 kilobits per second for
each voice call.
The way this can be done is
there is this source filter model credited
to Gunnar Fant of the Royal Institute
of Technology in Stockholm.
He provided a model of how
speech production works.
And a practical use of this for
compressing speech from 64
kilobits per second down to 8
kilobits per second was laid
down in late 60s at AT&T by Bishnu Atal.
And this is called
Linear Predictive Coding theory.
This actually became workhorse for
the speech compression in all
cellular telephone networks
starting from 2G up to 4G and
possibly even 5G.
These principles apply to many other
speech processing tasks besides
speech compression.
And when we apply this for
speech compression,
the common term that people use is
vocoder, that is, voice coder and decoder.
Vocorder.
So briefly this is how
the source filter theory works.
If you think of all the body
parts that are involved in making
speech sounds,
there are voiced sounds like ee.
If you keep your hand on your throat and
say ahh, you can feel the vibrations.
These are voiced sounds.
And when you say sounds like sam or
farther,
the s or f, there is no such vibration.
So this is the source.
The lungs and the glottis form the source.
And when you say a word like cat,
you're stopping the vocal tract
at the back of your mouth.
And when you say pat,
the closure is right in the front.
So the vocal tract is changing
a lot more slowly than the input
that's come into the system, so that's
why we have the source and the filter.
We'll get in more detail
of this in course four.
But the takeaway message right now is,
you can map the human speech production
into a block diagram of the vocal tract
that varies very slowly and the input,
either periodic or noisy,
that drives the system.
And using this information,
the linear predictive coding computes
a small set of parameters that can
be used to reconstruct this signal.
So the challenge is, if you're given
a short segment of the signal, let's say
roughly 20 milliseconds, how do you
compute the best possible parameters for
the all-pole filter shown by A(z) here,
the gain of the filter?
And what exactly in the import
that would go in at a given time?
The pitch period,
which is an impulse generator or
a white noise, and
a switch that toggles between these two.
So this mathematical model takes the
signal and comes up with these parameters.
This is only a model.
It will not capture the richness of speech
signals spoken by different people.
So there is an error.
We call this the error signal.
And sometimes we call
them the innovation and
the signal,
also called ignorance modeling.
Whatever we did not capture using our
model, we take that ignorance and
send that information using certain
number of parameters to the receiver.
So depending on the computational
resources of the sender and
how much data rate you want for
the ignorance signal,
you can get about 0.5
to 1.5 bits per sample.
This translates to about 4 to
12 kilobits per second instead
of 64 kilobits per second used in
the digital wire line telephony.
The reconstruction quality depends
on how much resources you put in
in estimating these parameters.
That's the CPU,
the complexity of the hardware that
you would have in your cell phone.
And the compression ratio,
how much did you squeeze it?
The goal is always to maintain call
quality, but sometimes people cut corners.
They use half-rate coders
instead of full-rate
coder when you have heavy
traffic in your system.
The other multiple access technique
that came in the 2G timeframe
is something called CDMA,
code division multiple access.
Here each user is assigned a specific
orthogonal code, like a code.
If you're interested, look it up in wiki.
If you don't get it,
it's not relevant for the main story.
The main story is each user is occupying
all the multiple channels
allocated to the carrier
all the time when they're on the phone.
So how do you differentiate each user,
the user that you are interested in?
When somebody's calling you,
they give you the specific code that
they are using to transmit their voice.
And using that, you can filter
away all the other users and
hear only the person that
you're interested in.
The reason I'm talking about this is,
the two ways you get more
capacity in CDMA compared to the TDMA.
One is, you have better spectral
efficiency of the modulation schemes.
And the second one is
statistical multiplexing gate.
What we mean by that is when
I'm saying words like ee,
you need more bits to
represent call quality,
as opposed to when I'm saying
[SOUND] in statistical.
And so when my speech doesn't
require that many bits,
I drop my vocoder rate accordingly,
based on source characteristics.
And this is called variable rate vocoders,
VBR.
Compared to the constant bit rate
vocoders that were being used in TDMA.
So what this means is,
as they drop the rate that I need,
I'm causing less interference for
the people in the system.
So this is how CDMA gets more capacity.
It's more spectrally
efficient than the TDMA
that was the competing 2G standard.